Trustworthy Collaborative Generative Learning (TCGL) for Cancer Survival Analysis with Multi-modality Data

The file of "TCGL_framework.png" provides the framework of the proposed method.

Abstract of TCGL: Multi-modality data has facilitated comprehensive assessment of cancer patients' conditions through the holistic characterization of biological mechanisms. However, current representation learning approaches for cancer prognosis often focus on discovering comprehensive representations that ignore local information about cancer subtypes, providing only rough stratification. Moreover, these methods struggle with noise variation across modalities and produce unreliable predictions with noisy or corrupted samples. Additionally, existing machine learning models scarcely estimate uncertainty in survival modeling and tend to be overconfident in their predictions. The challenge of informative censoring, where the censoring mechanism is relevant for inference about survival time distribution, further complicates unbiased survival analysis. In this paper, we propose a Trustworthy Collaborative Generative (TCGL) paradigm for human cancer including trustworthy discriminative representation learning and trustworthy unbiased survival analysis. TCGL first employs Hierarchical Gaussian Processes to incorporate data uncertainty within a novel kernel function, then applies Dirichlet Process to mixture priors to adaptively discover potential subtypes within a unified probabilistic framework. For survival analysis, TCGL handles the neglected but complex scenario of informative censoring by integrating multi-source uncertainties and imposing refined constraints to approximate the empirical distribution of survival time. Extensive experiments on five datasets from TCGA underscore its superior capabilities, demonstrating effectiveness across a range of experimental settings compared to state-of-the-art methods.
